blog: DIY: Create Your Own Cloud with Kubernetes (Part 2) blog post (#45432)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-02-22-diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-2/index.md

date: 2024-02-04
---

**Author**: Andrei Kvapil (Ænix)

Continuing our series of posts on how to build your own cloud using just the Kubernetes ecosystem.
In the [previous article](/blog/2024/01/22/diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-1/), we explained how we prepare a basic Kubernetes distribution based on Talos Linux and Flux CD.
In this article, we'll show you a few various virtualization technologies in Kubernetes and prepare everything need to run virtual machines in Kubernetes, primarily storage and networking.

We will talk about technologies such as KubeVirt, LINSTOR, and Kube-OVN.

But first, let's explain why virtual machines are needed for, and why can't you just use docker containers for building cloud?
The reason is that containers do not provide a sufficient level of isolation.
Although the situation improves year by year, we often encounter vulnerabilities that allow escaping the container sandbox and elevating privileges in the system.

On the other hand, Kubernetes was not originally designed to be multi-tenant system, meaning the basic usage pattern involves creating a separate Kubernetes cluster for every independent project and development team.

> Virtual machines are the primary means of isolating tenants from each other in a cloud. In virtual machines, users are allowed to run any code with administrative rights, but this don't affect other tenants or the cloud system itself. In other words, virtual machines allows to achieve [hard multi-tenancy isolation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/multi-tenancy/#isolation), and run in environments where tenants do not trust each other.

Reviewer: We use site-relative links where feasible.
```suggestion
Virtual machines are the primary means of isolating tenants from each other in a cloud. In virtual machines, users are allowed to run any code with administrative rights, but this don't affect other tenants or the cloud system itself. In other words, virtual machines allows to achieve [hard multi-tenancy isolation](/docs/concepts/security/multi-tenancy/#isolation), and run in environments where tenants do not trust each other.
```

### Virtualization technologies in Kubernetes

There are several different technologies that bring virtualization into the Kubernetes world: [KubeVirt](https://kubevirt.io/) and [Kata Containers](https://katacontainers.io/)
are the most popular ones. But you should know that they work differently.

**Kata Containers** implements the CRI (Container Runtime Interface) and provides an additional level of isolation for standard containers by running them in virtual machines. But they work in a same single Kubernetes-cluster.

> ![Simplified diagram of Kata-Containers](kata-containers.svg)

Reviewer: Consider using [figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) shortcode to display images in the blog content.

**KubeVirt** allows to run of traditional virtual machines using the Kubernetes API. KubeVirt virtual machines are run as regular linux processes in containers. In other words, in KubeVirt a container used simple as a sandbox for running virtual machine (QEMU) processes.
This can be clearly seen by looking at how live migration of virtual machines is implemented in KubeVirt. When migration is needed, the virtual machine moved from one container to another.

{{< figure src="kubevirt-migration.svg" caption="A diagram showing live migration of a virtual machine from one container to another in KubeVirt" alt="A diagram showing live migration of a virtual machine from one container to another in KubeVirt" >}}

There is also an alternative project - [Virtink](https://github.com/smartxworks/virtink), which implements lightweight virtualization using [Cloud-Hypervisor](https://github.com/cloud-hypervisor/cloud-hypervisor) and is initially focused on running virtual Kubernetes clusters using the Cluster API.

Considering our goals, we decided to use KubeVirt as the most popular project in this area. Besides we have extensive expertise and already made a lot of contributions to KubeVirt.

> KubeVirt is [easy to install](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/installation/) and out-of-box allows you to run virtual machines using [containerDisk](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/virtual_machines/disks_and_volumes/#containerdisk) feature - this allows you to store and distribute VM images directly as OCI images from container image registry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
KubeVirt is [easy to install](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/installation/) and allows you to run virtual machines  out-of-the-box using [containerDisk](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/virtual_machines/disks_and_volumes/#containerdisk) feature - this allows you to store and distribute VM images directly as OCI images from container image registry.
```

Virtual machines with containerDisk are well suited for creating Kubernetes worker nodes and other VMs that do not require state persistence.

For managing persistent data, KubeVirt offers a separate tool, Containerized Data Importer (CDI). It allows for cloning PVCs and populating them with data from base images. The CDI is necessary if you want to automatically provision persistent volumes for your virtual machines, and it is also required for the KubeVirt CSI Driver, which is used to handle persistent volumes claims from tenant Kubernetes clusters.

But at first, you have to decide where and how you will store these data.

## Storage for Kubernetes VMs

With the introduction of the CSI (Container Storage Interface), a wide range of technologies that integrate with Kubernetes has become available.
In fact, KubeVirt fully utilizes the CSI interface, aligning the choice of storage for virtualization closely with the choice of storage for Kubernetes itself.

> However, there are nuances, which you need to consider. Unlike containers, which typically use a standard filesystem, block devices are more efficient for virtual machine .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, there are nuances, which you need to consider. Unlike containers, which typically use a standard filesystem, block devices are more efficient for virtual machine.
```

> Although the CSI interface in Kubernetes allows the request of both types of volumes either a filesystem or block devices—it's important to verify that your storage backend supports this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although the CSI interface in Kubernetes allows the request of both types of volumes: filesystems and block devices, it's important to verify that your storage backend supports this.
```

> Using block devices for virtual machines eliminates the need for an additional abstraction layer, such as a filesystem, that makes it more performant and in most cases enables the use of the ReadWriteMany mode. This mode allows concurrent access to the volume from multiple nodes, which is a critical feature for enabling the live migration of virtual machines in KubeVirt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using block devices for virtual machines eliminates the need for an additional abstraction layer, such as a filesystem, that makes it more performant and in most cases enables the use of the _ReadWriteMany_ mode. This mode allows concurrent access to the volume from multiple nodes, which is a critical feature for enabling the live migration of virtual machines in KubeVirt.
```

> The storage system can be external or internal (in the case of hyper-converged infrastructure). Using external storage in many cases makes the whole system more stable, as your data is stored on separately from compute nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The storage system can be external or internal (in the case of hyper-converged infrastructure). Using external storage in many cases makes the whole system more stable, as your data is stored separately from compute nodes.
```

{{< figure src="storage-local.svg" caption="A diagram showing local data storage running on the compute nodes" alt="A diagram showing local data storage running on the compute nodes" >}}

On the other hand, hyper-converged systems are often implemented using local storage (when you do not need replication) and with software-defined storages, often installed directly in Kubernetes, such as [Rook/Ceph](https://rook.io/), [OpenEBS](https://openebs.io/), [Longhorn](https://longhorn.io/), [LINSTOR](https://linbit.com/linstor/), and others.

{{< figure src="storage-clustered.svg" caption="A diagram showing clustered data storage running on the compute nodes" alt="A diagram showing clustered data storage running on the compute nodes" >}}

> A hyper-converged system has its advantages, e.g. data locality: when your data is stored locally, access to such data is faster, but there are disadvantages as such a system is usually more difficult to manage and maintain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A hyper-converged system has its advantages. For example, data locality: when your data is stored locally, access to such data is faster. But there are disadvantages as such a system is usually more difficult to manage and maintain.
```

At Ænix, we wanted to provide a ready-to-use solution that could be used without the need to purchase and setup an additional external storage, and that was optimal in terms of speed and resource utilization. LINSTOR became that solution.
The time-tested and industry-popular technologies such as LVM and ZFS as backend gives confidence that data is securely stored. DRBD-based replication is incredible fast and consumes a small amount of computing resources.

For installing LINSTOR in Kubernetes, there is the Piraeus project, which already provides a ready-made block storage to use with KubeVirt.

> > **Note**: In case you are using Talos Linux, as we described in the [previous article](/blog/2024/01/22/diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-1/), you will need to enable the necessary kernel modules in advance, and configure piraeus as described in the [instruction](https://github.com/piraeusdatastore/piraeus-operator/blob/v2/docs/how-to/talos.md).

Reviewer 2: Please consider using a {{<note>}} shortcake here

## Networking for Kubernetes VMs

> Despite having the similar interface - CNI. The network architecture in Kubernetes is actually more complex and typically consists of many independent components that are not directly connected to each other. In fact you can split Kubernetes networking to four layers, which are described below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite having the similar interface - CNI, The network architecture in Kubernetes is actually more complex and typically consists of many independent components that are not directly connected to each other. In fact you can split Kubernetes networking into four layers, which are described below.
```

Author: @Gauravpadam thank you, could you please explain if it is correct?

> Despite having the similar interface - CNI, The network architecture in Kubernetes is...

shouldn't it be:

> Despite having the similar interface - CNI, the network architecture in Kubernetes is...

### Node Network (Data Center Network)

> The network through which nodes are interconnected with each other. This network is usually not managed by Kubernetes, but it is an important because without it, nothing would work. In practice, the bare metal infrastructure usually have more than one of such networks e.g. one for node-to-node communication, second for storage replication, third for external access, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The network through which nodes are interconnected with each other. This network is usually not managed by Kubernetes, but it is an important one because, without it, nothing would work. In practice, the bare metal infrastructure usually has more than one of such networks e.g. one for node-to-node communication, second for storage replication, third for external access, etc.
```

### Pod Network

This is the network provided by your CNI plugin. The task of the CNI plugin is to ensure transparent connectivity between all containers and nodes in the cluster. Most CNI plugins implement a flat network from which separate blocks of IP addresses are allocated for use on each node.

{{< figure src="net-pods.svg" caption="A diagram showing the role of the pod network (CNI-plugin) on the Kubernetes network scheme" alt="A diagram showing the role of the pod network (CNI-plugin) on the Kubernetes network scheme" >}}

In practice, your cluster can have several CNI plugins managed by [Multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni). This approach is often used in virtualization solutions based on KubeVirt - [Rancher](https://www.rancher.com/) and [OpenShift](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift/virtualization). The primary CNI plugin is used for integration with Kubernetes services, while additional CNI plugins are used to implement private networks (VPC) and integration with the physical networks of your data center.

> The [default CNI-plugins](https://github.com/containernetworking/plugins/tree/main/plugins) can be used to connect bridges or physical interfaces. Additionally, there are specialized plugins such as [macvtap-cni](https://github.com/kubevirt/macvtap-cni) which designed to provide a more performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [default CNI-plugins](https://github.com/containernetworking/plugins/tree/main/plugins) can be used to connect bridges or physical interfaces. Additionally, there are specialized plugins such as [macvtap-cni](https://github.com/kubevirt/macvtap-cni) which are designed to provide more performance.
```

> One additional aspect to keep in mind when running virtual machines in Kubernetes is the need for IPAM (IP Address Management), especially for secondary interfaces provided by Multus. This is commonly managed by a DHCP server operating within your infrastructure. Additionally, the allocation of MAC addresses for virtual machines, that can be managed by [Kubemacpool](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/kubemacpool).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One additional aspect to keep in mind when running virtual machines in Kubernetes is the need for IPAM (IP Address Management), especially for secondary interfaces provided by Multus. This is commonly managed by a DHCP server operating within your infrastructure. Additionally, the allocation of MAC addresses for virtual machines can be managed by [Kubemacpool](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/kubemacpool).
```

In Kube-OVN you can assign separate subnets to an entire namespace or connect them as additional network interfaces using Multus.

### Services Network

In addition to the CNI plugin, Kubernetes also has a services network, which is primarily needed for service discovery.
Contrary to traditional virtual machines, Kubernetes originally designed to run pods with a random address.
And the services network provides a convenient abstraction (stable IP addresses and DNS names) that will always direct traffic to the correct pod.
The same approach is also commonly used with virtual machines in clouds despite the fact that their IPs are usually static.

{{< figure src="net-services.svg" caption="A diagram showing the role of the services network (services network plugin) on the Kubernetes network scheme" alt="A diagram showing the role of the services network (services network plugin) on the Kubernetes network scheme" >}}

The implementation of the services network in Kubernetes is handled by the services network plugin, The standard implementation is called **kube-proxy** and is used in most clusters.

> But nowadays this functionality might be provided as part of the CNI plugin. The most advanced implementation is offered by the [Cilium](https://cilium.io/) project, which can be run in kube-proxy replacement mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But nowadays, this functionality might be provided as part of the CNI plugin. The most advanced implementation is offered by the [Cilium](https://cilium.io/) project, which can be run in kube-proxy replacement mode.
```

Cilium is based on the eBPF technology, which allows for efficient offloading of the Linux networking stack, thereby improving performance and security compared to traditional methods based on iptables.

In practice, Cilium and Kube-OVN can be easily [integrated](https://kube-ovn.readthedocs.io/zh-cn/stable/en/advance/with-cilium/) to provide a unified solution that offers seamless multi-tenant networking for virtual machines, as well as advanced network policies and combined services network functionality.

### External Traffic Load Balancer

> At this stage, you already have everything need to run virtual machines in Kubernetes. But there is actually one more thing.
> You still need to access your services from outside your cluster, and an external load balancer will help you with organizing this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this stage, you already have everything needed to run virtual machines in Kubernetes. But there is actually one more thing.
You still need to access your services from outside your cluster, and an external load balancer will help you with organizing this.
```
